I love the 10th series.
I remember liking this eight years ago, whenever it was that we read it.
And, you know, I know we had talked about thinking about the Aeon in terms of Kairos.
I don't know how easily those two things map onto each other, because in a whole lot of
ways, the way that Deleuze is writing about Kronos here as the sort of all-encompassing
present that sort of absorbs all futures and pasts into it, and, you know, sort of like
this throbbing living entity.
That sounds like a whole lot like versions of Kairos that we talk about.
It's sort of like, you know, the intersection of a whole bunch of qualitative forces that
open up some possibilities and close down others.
That sounds like Kairos.
But then some of these descriptions about the Aeon as well is sort of like, you know, this,
the infinite divisibility of futures and pasts also resonates with notions of Kairos.
So I don't, I just, what I would want, among other things, we can do whatever we want, but
I wouldn't mind thinking about the relationship between Aeon, Kronos, and Kairos, Kronos.
And I think we might have to think about these two notions of Kronos differently and just
see how those two things resonate with each other.
That's, I'm curious about that to hear what y'all think.
So, I mean, because to me, most of the way that Kairos gets mobilized in our field and
even in other stuff is really against the kind of quantitative, it's a quantitative versus
qualitative distinction.
So if Kronos becomes the quantifiable divisible sense of time, Kairos is the qualitative indivisible
or maybe just more vaguely divisible sense of time.
So the configuration of Kronos in our usual uptake is different, right, than his sense
of Kronos in terms of that always, the gathered present.
So, and I think that, so the, I think you're right, Nathaniel, like the term Kairos does
a different kind of work than the work that he's trying to do because Kronos, his target
is something different, his target is not the divisible component, it is much more, you
know, the, well, I mean, I guess the, the, the directionality, right, like that that's
his, the real target here is he wants the bi-directionality, this sort of spreading out, I mean, I think of
it more like sort of pebble in the pond kind of image.
He wants that, that image rather than the kind of linear progressive version.
So it's just different targets means you're going to have a different configuration of,
of all of the terms, you know.
Yeah, I'm just, I mean, I, I totally agree.
I just, I just wonder what happens when we think about this triangulation, you know, thinking
these terms together, right.
And I'm just wondering if that'll spark some interesting resonances that, I mean, I get
that, you know, the purposes of the two, of mobilizing the two terms are, are different
and they're going to yield different responses.
I'm just, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm just kind of posing a thought experiment.
I think the similarity that I would want to point to is the distinction between states of
affairs and the incorporeality, right.
So that if Kronos is, and that works here, right, like he's, Kronos is for, for his sense
of Kronos is the sort of state of affairs component of it.
And I think that that's the same as, you know, oftentimes what we talk about in our field versus
the incorporeal dimension, that there's some other quality, I mean, I'm calling it quantitative
and qualitative, but there's, there's some other dimension of connectedness that is irreducible
to the, to the sort of description of the, the recognizable or identifiable state of, state
of affairs.
And so I get, I mean, I think that you can, you can link them, right.
Like, and so that's the sense for me in which Kairos in our disciplinary history links
with what he's doing with Aeon there.
Well, or I bet with, with Kronos as well is, I mean, I think sometimes we have, we struggle
to think about Kairos without resource to Kronos, because often what happens is that Kairos just
becomes sort of like the look and feel of a particular chronological division of, of time,
right.
It's like, you know, I can look at these 30 seconds and then I can start talking about how
these different things interact with each other and the kinds of rhetorical openings they
open up and close down.
But that's really kind of subjugating Kairos to, to Kronos, right.
And one of the interesting things that is happening here is like, you know, the, the game without
the preset rules where every cast of the die infinitely divides up the, the, the, the space
of, of playing again.
So you would never be able to talk about a general chronological time within which Kairotic
time operates, but this like time is remade, you know, at every, with every throw of the
dice.
And that's what I really like about the relationship between the Aeon and, and Kronos here.
You know, you said you, you, John pointed out that, you know, we can kind of think about
Aeon in terms of the event and Kronos in terms of states of affairs.
And there's a great line where he said, I think this is, here we are on, on 63 in the middle
of that first full paragraph.
Um, this is, this present does not contradict the Aeon and this is where he's, you know,
these aren't just like two different ways of talking about the same thing.
Um, on the contrary, it is the present as B as being of reason, which is subdivided ad
infinitum into something that has just happened and something that is going to happen, always
flying in both directions at once.
The other present, the living present Kronos happens and brings about the event.
And so here, like a state of affairs, the body as sort of like a set of related differences,
I mean, expresses a singular difference that is the event that now shoots the Aeon in both
directions out of that present.
Well, let's, but the next sentence is matters too, right?
But the event nonetheless retains an eternal truth upon the line of Aeon, which divides eternally
an approximate past and imminent future.
So it's not just like, it's not causal in that sense.
It's not like there was a whole bunch happening and then an event occurred.
No, every, every configuration, every chronological configuration would be an event that, that, um, you
know, to use the language earlier, it just has its, it just has its, it has its different
dimensions, right?
Like, I mean, in that sense.
So it just, yeah, it distributes its singularities along different series that are irreducible
to the state of affairs, I think.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's where, I mean, I totally agree with you.
I agree with like what you said a moment ago of, and I think this is true, is that most,
most treatments of Kairos in our field or otherwise treat, whether they say it or not, treat Kairos
as a subset of Kairos, which is to say at this moment, which is 2021 or whatever time period,
there are, he's a, here are the available means of persuasion across this sort of lateral
qualitative field.
And in that sense, Kairos is treated as a subset of this larger thing called Kronos.
And what's important for him here is that it's not a subset.
It's just another dimension.
And that's where, to me, I mean, years ago when I was working with Kairos a little bit
was Negri is the one who says like the, the, the term for Kairos is eternity, right?
Like that's, that's the word, the empirical term.
Yeah.
And it's like, no, it has to be thought as eternity, not 2021 or, or, you know, whatever
this month or this day, or it's not, it's not thought in terms of a subset of the Kronos
thing that that's, that's where you do need it.
It's, it's two simultaneous dimensions of times chronologically superimposed on one another
that create relays among their series.
Which is, this is the way to tie it back to the game is that when you think about Kairos
as eternity or infinity, I can't remember what the term is, but it's like eternity, then,
you know, every, every role of that, of every, every return of difference, right?
It's not, it doesn't just, you know, it doesn't just affect this moment chronologically.
It remakes the entire universe, right?
I mean, it, it, it, it distributes its singular difference infinitely in both, in both the future
and in the past, right?
So I actually consulted Williams on this because I really struggle with time.
I don't know.
I'm with you.
I do too.
It's always late.
Time is, it was just, this was particularly challenging for me and I wanted to know if,
I don't know, if, if Williams could give me any language for understanding it.
And I, I really liked what he gave, which was essentially like this idea of planes kind of
floating in liquid, you know, he writes, um, you know, when a plane, which is like that
actual world, right?
Vibrates, it moves all the others, not by touching them, but through the virtual liquid
medium.
Reality is the medium and all the planes, but it is also a perspective from any given plane.
From that perspective, it is easier to think that the chosen plane is all there is and that
all, and that all others are, but possible worlds.
Deleuze wants to remind us that we live with many potentials, the ongoing movement of liquid
and with many worlds, all the perspectives that energize ours without actual causal relation
to it.
Are you saying liquid as in like water or a liquid as in like the Latin term for something?
Liquid as in water.
Okay.
Oh, I'm sorry.
So we're, okay.
Interesting.
Yeah.
That makes sense, right?
No, that makes sense.
No, I like that.
Yeah, I do too.
It does.
And I'm with you on the, I'm with you on the time thing because I think frankly, you
have to, at least for me, it's just very hard to not think, it's very hard to not think
linearly.
I mean, it's, I mean, it's, everybody says that and it's just a kind of, you know, but
it's very hard to not have that be the governing sense.
So, I mean, what has, what has helped me.
Governing good sense, right?
No, no, really.
Exactly.
It is, yeah.
Like, it's a good sense.
I was going to say, oh, what has helped me in terms of thinking of time a little bit
is actually sort of theoretical physics within which time isn't an entity that acts.
It is nothing but an embodiment of material movement.
There's not a thing called time that moves in any direction at all.
There's just stuff and stuff does things, right?
And so, and for me, that allows me to kind of, I don't know, develop a less linear, for
whatever reason, a less linear way of thinking about time is not an entity that acts on things.
There's nothing, it's not like time changes anything, right?
Things change in relation to other things.
And it's like, and we call that change time.
And so there is no such thing as time in that sense.
It is simply a term we use by extracting relations of bodies, you know, to one another.
And we call it that.
When I start thinking of it in those terms, it becomes a lot easier for me to think of
its dual directionality, its spatiality, its intricate complexity and not linearity
when I don't think, when I really sort of try to get in, like, time is not a thing that does stuff, you know.
And because we're just so kind of, I guess, acculturated to thinking time changes all, it's like, no, time doesn't do anything.
You know, time's just a word for.
Okay, that's very helpful because I think something that I also really struggle with,
and maybe this is because of how I think about Kairos, is I want time to also have a value, definitely.
Like, that there are better times, that there are worse times, right?
That, like, there is an inherent, you know, that subsection that is Kairos.
Obviously, this is the qualitative relationship to Kronos, right?
But that you can take a piece of time and say this was better or this was worse, right?
That I also struggle with, too, in terms of deprogramming the good sense that is how I think.
Right, right.
I mean, the way I think of those evaluations of times is to think of them, I mean, not to think of it about them
as distance descriptions of something that is not part of that time.
But, like, you know, to talk about that good time would to be a, to interject a value in this present
that has now sort of absorbed that past and rearticulated it and reinterpreted it.
So, the value judgment is, like, is one among other forces that are circulating in,
that circulate in order to sort of make that time, right?
Right.
So, think of it this way.
Like, here's an expression that you hear all the time is, well, you know, things happen in time.
And the Deleuzean, the Aeon version is, no, nothing ever happens in time.
Time is not this, like, giant container in which we're moving.
Nothing happens in time.
Speaking precisely in terms of those words, time is the happening of relationality.
Yeah, and even, I mean, that, but it's also an introduction.
I mean, this is why I like Kant on this, you know, I mean, I would, I have to denaturalize him,
but I like Kant just saying, like, look, time is, along with space, is the introduction of a category by, you know,
the human mind onto the noumena in order to organize it, right?
That it is, now, like, I think you would have to modify, oh, I'm going to let that whistle.
Larissa's making some tea.
She's making some tea.
Hi, Larissa.
Oh, she can't hear us.
For Kant, time is just a category of the human mind that then is, or organizes the world around us.
And, you know, when I was just writing the Kairos chapter yesterday, and, you know, I, you know,
I don't know this for sure, but, like, my sense of Greek writing is Kairos is the older version of time.
Yeah, I think that's right.
Like, Kronos is the newer understanding of time.
As soon as you denaturalize the sort of time-space notions of the mind that Kant, like, you know,
human bodies develop, you know, or, like, categories sort of emerge from various convergences that,
you know, like, project and carve up time linearly.
Like, some combinations, you know, project a linear sense of time.
Others, what we would call a more kairotic sense of time.
Like, we, just think about the, I think, you know, just the introduction of the mechanical clock, right,
has a whole lot to do with the way that we, that, that.
Conceptualize it.
Yeah, which is an act, it's not a person, it's not a, I know Kant talks about these as being passive faculties
as they happen, whether you want them to or not.
But I would still say, in a sense, they're active in that, like, we are actively dividing the raw material
of the world up in turn, like, and making it in, in, in, according to this or that conception of time.
And it requires no conscious effort on our part whatsoever, which is, also makes it passive.
And, in that, in that conception then, and this may be a better way of thinking of it, you know,
is that Kronos and Kairos are their own kind of couplet that are just both kind of distinct from Aeon then, right?
Like, that Aeon, not, distinct is not exactly the right word, but that Aeon, you'd say, like,
Aeon is the kind of condition of liquid in, in, in Caddy's, uh, William, Caddy's William's term.
Through which the plane emerges, right?
And that plane has a qualitative and quantitative dimension.
But, in that sense, even, I mean, so I guess what I have been doing in my own head is pushing Kairos
towards what we're calling Aeon in this case.
Uh, even though I recognize that in most rhetorical treatments, it really doesn't get pushed that way.
It just becomes something that's non-divisible, right?
Like, um, so, so, uh, so the, the couplet of, of Kairos, Kronos would, or Kronos, Kairos, whatever,
would be, you know, its own, that would be the kind of intelligibility, that would be the sensible,
the, the good sense ways of thinking of time.
And, in that, in that couplet, Kairos is still an interesting, you know, provides an interesting
counterpoint to Kronos, and yet, nevertheless, it's still governed by, uh, a, a horizon of
intelligibility, uh, that, that sort of elides its connection to this other sense of what here
we call Aeon.
Yeah.
I mean, to me, one of the most interesting things is just also the way that it, it, it
messes with our notion of, of Kronos, right?
It's by, by linking Kronos to Aeon, it, it sort of multiplies our understanding of, we
could even think about a Kronos-Kronos couplet.
Um, I mean, like, we can transition this into, I mean, thinking time in relationship to the
game.
Obviously, this whole thing is supposedly on games.
We've been talking about time the whole time, but, um, you know, it seems to be, to me,
the, the, the link seems relatively obvious where that, you know, any moment of playing
the game is, is, is that, in that, that temporal sense, the, the casting of the die that, um,
returns, uh, a difference that then remakes the rules of the game, right?
Right.
And, I mean, that, if I'm going to map it onto the, the, the temporal terminology that
we've been using is that any chronological present as the sort of totality, the eternal
totality of all futures and pasts into the moment expresses itself into the event and which
then, like, triggers the aeon to infinitely subdivide futures and pasts, calls together a new, um,
chronological body, which then expresses a new difference.
And you can sort of read that rhythm back onto the logic of the game of, you know, the, the
element of chance is thrown.
And then rather than whatever that chance returns as sort of like just fitting on a
prefigured, um, uh, playing board, it is remaking the board and all of the rules that go along
with it.
I was just going to say that we had this, we had this conversation during our last meeting
with Brooke about the, the very, I think difficult to wrap your head around, um, balance between,
um, a laity and a necessity and sort of like what, what does, yeah, what does control, what
is, how is this control or how is this chance?
How is, um, uh, how, how is it, um, shaped without being curtailed, without being sort
of predetermined in advance?
And I think this kind of gives a language for articulating that better is that, you know,
when the die is thrown and the return is just sort of categorized on the preexisting board,
that's, that's not sufficiently, that's not sufficiently chance, but that when the die is thrown and
it remakes the rules, that is chance, but that's not that totally random notion of chance for
anything at all possible can be returned because it relies on the specificity or not the specific,
the singularity of the role.
And I think it actually, yeah.
And I, and I think that that, the, the temporal language that we were, we've been using actually
helps conceptualize that a little bit better because, you know, the, the, the, the chronological
present is a singular configuration of bodies, right?
That expresses a singular, um, uh, event that then remakes the entirety of the board across the,
in virtue of a singular difference, uh, differential, right?
And so this is both on the unthinkable, literally the unthinkably new because the rules are being
created in response to it, but then still shaped by the singularity, the uniqueness of that chronological
body.
The states of the states of affairs, right?
Yeah.
I mean, that's how I, like for me, whenever I think of the game thing, this particular,
and I, I liked that, that chunk too.
Um, but I remember when I first read it and I was just like, oh, why are we talking about
ideal games?
Like, this just seems kind of, I mean, not the kind of thing that Deleuze would generally
be interested in, right?
Um, I, the ideal game, like the platonic ideal of a game or something.
Um, and I, for me, the, what always helped me was it just to conceptualize it.
If you just kind of back out chronologically from sort of human lifespan, that description
of the ideal game is what life is.
Like, that's just actually what's happening, right?
Like, it's, it doesn't, it doesn't happen at the level of an individual lifetime or a game,
you know, but it's like, no, no, no, things happen, rules are remade, things happen, rules
are, rules are remade, you know, that, that is, that is the terrain where, and it's easier
for me, at least to, to think of it, you know, world historically, uh, you know, it's easier
to think of it in those terms.
It's like, no, no, no, what he's describing here isn't, isn't an ideal in that platonic
sense.
It is the conditions through which all of the other sort of smaller game-like actualizations
occur.
And, and that's what allows me to link those series such that the ideal is not transcendent,
right?
Uh, at all, right?
Or, or we have to, we, we would fuck with the term transcendent if we want to use that
term, right?
But I mean, it's not, it's, it's in fact the imminent condition for states of affairs.
And that's when it, I'm like, ah, now, now I understand to lose again, you know, now it
sounds to me like to lose again, rather than the term, just for me, the term, the ideal
game just always really kind of threw me, you know, it's like that there's some sort of
game up in the, it's like, no, no, no.
What he's saying is no, no, no, this is, this is the temporal and spatial conditions for
all of the things that look like quote unquote normal games so that when you're playing normal
games, you're actually not just playing normal games, right?
Like those confined little games that we play that have the rules and have all these things,
they're also part of the process of the no rule making.
Well, you know, he, when he's talking about it being, oh, go for it, Caddy.
Oh, no, no, you go ahead.
I was just going to say that the, um, that when he's talking about this being an ideal game,
he then immediately starts to, um, think that he starts to run that through the activity
of thinking, which is very clearly at an, like an empirical, like that is not a transcendent
removed active mental activity that is, you know, a, a, yeah, another, uh, kind of, of,
um, force on, on, on the imminent playing or on the, on the, the flat ontological playing.
So that, that makes sense to me.
And then, you know, to speak, yeah, yeah.
And I love that, that line is that here we have to start thinking about, you know, it
can only be thought as nonsense, which is literally like the, the, the, the common sense
or the, the, the good sense that governs a particular game, when that differential is
run back and is remaking that sense, it has to return as nonsense, right?
It cannot be, it cannot be interpretable by the, you know, well, it's, it's definitely
interpretable.
Yeah.
Everything is interpretable by, you know, you can, whatever, even if it's, but the, the
point is, is that that nonsense as that sort of a signifying force is undoing and
remaking that.
And it sounds, it doesn't, it's, I mean, you're right.
Like, and it doesn't, that's where I'm like, oh, this is difference in repetition, right?
Like, I mean, it really, it's the same kind of thinking, which I just always had a difficult
time connecting these things of like pure difference.
That's what you're talking about here, you know, or difference, difference in itself or,
you know, a repetition in itself as the sort of, and that, I mean, that's where I'm like,
Oh, this is starting to, now again, what I'm saying is this starts to form a pattern with
early Deleuzian things that I already understood and therefore makes it more intelligible to
me.
I mean, and that's true, right?
I mean, that is true.
But.
I, I just don't, I don't really get the ideal, the language of ideal in relation to the language
of known either.
That doesn't work for me either because it's really seems like you have to have, you have
to have known in order to have ideal.
And when you think you have known, you actually have ideal and vice versa.
You know what I mean?
Like those two, those two kind of functions are always, are happening at the same time.
You know, you can't have, it's just kind of like the, the gift of sense on, on page 81
where he's kind of like, that's, that's only going to occur when the conditions of signification
are also being determined.
The ideal game is only going to occur when the known game is also in play, you know?
Yeah.
Right?
So, so, so the language doesn't make any sense to me, like in terms of their relationality,
ideal and known.
I, I feel the same way.
That's what, I mean, that's where I began that thing of the, the notion of, of the ideal
in the Platonic sense, but I, I get what you're saying.
Um, so you, there has to be, I mean, I think the idea here is to think of a way of saying
that the known, there's something that is irreducible to the known, right?
Like we'll start with that sort of small point, like irre, irreducible to that, which
is known, but not because it is other than the known, meaning it's not like in a, just
a separate terrain.
And so trying to think that, that interrelation or the, you know, imminence to use a term that
he's going to use later, like the imminent relation among those things such that the known
is what, uh, you know, and I don't even want to say this, but I, I do always think of it
this way, the known is a kind of external manifestation of some, uh, of what here he's
calling the ideal, but it doesn't function as the Platonic ideal, which is to say, it's
not, it's not an ideal that if everything was perfected about the known, it would look like
this, right?
In fact, it seems to me that the ideal is the nonsense, you know, it is the condition
of the paradoxical directions.
Right.
So, yeah, it seems to me that the known is the sort of sense sensible terrain of the normal
game that now has been divided and allows for, you know, like a certain logic of cause and
effect and like a moral order that makes everything interpretable and, and, and livable.
And, and the ideal game is the sort of the, uh, the, the imminent, um, um, uh, um, game
outside of that.
I mean, like the game within the game, I guess if you want imminent would be the game within
the game that is going to undo and remake that game.
Right.
So this is why, you know, the language of the known is being attached to a sense, a common
sense, a good sense, whereas the ideal here is sort of referring more to the, the, the
Back and forth between sense and nonsense, like the interjection of nonsense that has
now the a signifying power of, of, of, um, inaugurating a, a, a new realm of sense.
And, you know, on, on 64, this, I think this is why he says the, the, the ion is the ideal
player of the game, right?
Like a sense of time here is the player of the game, not, you know, not, not, not a person.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, what do you do?
I mean, this is, this is related to the question that you just asked, Caddy.
And it was a question that, that popped up when I was reading it last night and thinking
about your, your work.
I mean, how do you react?
Like, I really, I mean, I liked the game stuff as well, but I mean, I read it a couple of
weeks ago, so, um, but I didn't remember reading the, the, the paradox one, which I really liked.
I mean, I really liked the common sense, good sense stuff.
And also because it's just more familiar with difference of repetition.
But what, what do you, in terms of your thinking of doxa do with that insofar as like, it seems
like doxa is for him, the bad guy, right?
Like it is, or the problem or the limiting function, you know, like the, the thing that
prevents us from, you know, attending to the sense of things is precisely, you know, doxa
here understood as good and common, you know, good sense and common sense.
I was just wondering what your response was in terms of your project there.
Well, that's why I turned us to page 81, because that quote is everything to, to what he's, I
think, trying to kind of wrap his head around when it comes to doxa being kind of that dominant
thinking in general that he is critiquing all over the place with both good sense and common
sense, but at the same time, recognizing that the insertion of nonsense and all of the creative
potential in that can't happen without doxa.
I mean, I think you're right, right?
Like there's, there's a way in which while common sense and good sense are sort of figured
as the bad guys here or the problem or the calcification or whatever else.
There are also the entirely necessary components of paradox.
Like you don't have paradox without doxa, right?
Like it's just not, it's not an option, right?
Right.
Exactly.
But it's, but it's, I mean, that's the interesting.
What would be a paradox without a dox to para?
That we, that we laughed at that, that all three of us laughed at that means we are fucking
losers.
Totally.
That we're all like, ah, that is fair.
But, you know, so paradox is opposed to doxa.
I mean, it's really pretty clear, right?
I mean, good, good sense, which is really, I mean, I think that's fairly clear and common.
For me, common sense has always been much more common sense as he describes it here.
Like the whole, the whole basis for the invention book was against identification, right?
Like identification and recognition, knowing what something is, is the problem, right?
And, and, and so, I mean, my thinking has changed a little, a little bit on that, but I still
feel like that's the primary target of everything that I do is like, if you know what something
is, then the game is already given up, right?
Right.
And so, you know, he, he's interested in that which is, I don't know, you know, as, you know,
we struggle with the, Nathaniel struggled with the prepositions a moment ago, like between,
within, you know, that is irreducible to, to doxa, that, that sense of the double, the
double movement, the nonsense, I mean, let's just call it the, the nonsense of the, the
double movement of common sense and good sense.
But what you don't get, I don't think as strongly here in this being again, early, earlier to
lose, as you get in the later stuff, is the sense in which it's, uh, the, the necessity
of doxa, right?
The necessity of the common and good sense, even as there are things that are the problem,
there are also the sort of necessary manifestations of, you know, it's not like, because you can
get this feeling from this, to a certain extent, it's like life would be better if we just lived
on an aeon plane, you know, if we just, if we just lived in the liquid and didn't deal
with the plane in Williams's terms, right?
We lived in the liquid and deal, didn't deal with the plane.
And that's what I like much more about Thousand Plateaus for me, is that there's much more
of a importance to the plane itself, right?
That, that, um, that there's a necessity to the plane, not just sort of the static quality
of the plane at all, but there's, and it may just be a question of emphasis, but I don't
get that sense of the necessity of the feedback loop, you know, to, to doxa here as, as much
as I, as you'll get it elsewhere, you know?
Right.
I mean, I think there's an interesting invitation to think about doxa in, in bodily terms here,
is that if, if you think about doxa as, you know, a relatively stable plane, I mean, think
about it as that, again, that chronological moment, the, the eternal presence or the state
of the eternal state of affairs is that like, I mean, it becomes an essential part of the
aeon and of nonsense.
And so far as it is like, it is the structure of that toxic body that now expresses an event
that expresses a unique difference that will undo the structure of that toxic body.
And I mean, like now I'm, I'm, I'm thinking more like Derridean deconstruction.
Is that like, look, a structure can't help, but undo itself, not because of some kind of
failure, but precisely because of the affirmation of its, of its own differential structure.
Right.
But that, that seems like a different emphasis than what we have here.
Because I, that is the more interesting version to me, um, which is that if we use it in those
terms, like structure is nothing but the condition of structure's dissolution, right?
I mean, that, that's, and Thousand Plateaus, right?
The molar entities are made up of nothing but lines of flight.
Like, but here I, I actually don't get as much of that sense.
I get much more of a kind of, you know, God is the sort of figure for good and, and common
sense, the supreme principle of identity and paradox here seems to function.
Yes.
It's within, but it also seems like it's an opposing function.
It's like, it's like you have two, two different forces.
One is coagulation and one is dissolution and they are, you know, in constant tension.
And that reads to me deeply Hegelian because what I read in, in Derrida and in later Deleuze
is that there, no, there are not two opposing forces.
There's one, there is one force.
It's, it's a monistic enterprise and it is all about transformation.
That's it.
That's the whole game.
And so you don't have this sense of, you know, on the one hand paradox and on the other hand,
you know, doxa and state, states of affairs.
And you get like, no, no, no.
I mean, it might be set up that way narratively.
But as you progress through it, you find, well, doxa is the entirely necessary, necessary is
even too weak of a word, right?
Like the absolutely necessary condition for dissolution.
Yeah.
Like you don't, you don't have anything without the stuffness of stuff.
You know, you don't have stuff transforming without identities.
You don't have, and maybe it's a question of the balancing or like the ratio of how you
think those two things.
I don't know.
Well, I wonder if there's, it's just a matter of emphasis though, too, because if what you
care about is the stuffness of the stuff, which would be now an extremely calcifying move,
the sort of like the goal of making the doxa not like stabilize or even worse, sort of like
rigidifying the true knowledge that, you know, that this becomes much more of a problem.
But if, if the emphasis is placed on the, the, the expression of the stuffness of stuff,
which is to say like, given a particular configuration of, given the, the, the, the,
the particular composition of a, of a, of a constellation of stuff, it's about what that, that,
that composition expresses, which is now how, you know, which is now how the, the, the monistic
engine runs.
Right.
So like, I mean, you know, you have, you get two senses of doxa, a body stuff, substance,
being, whatever it is that, that, that, that you're looking at.
It kind of just depends on one's orientation to it.
Right.
And if we think about, if we think about the expression that might be doxa, right?
We, we can see where there's a problem here with the expression.
There's a lack in the expression when doxa as common sense tries to know and doxa as good
sense tries to halt or to stop.
But then we can also see that there is also excess in that expression as well.
And that is always that moment, I think, for Deleuze, where you have something productive,
something, you know, full of potential.
And, and I think it's hard to wrap your mind around those dual impulses, you know?
Well, I'm certainly not thinking about substance and it's more sort of like temporal or not
temporal, like spatial sense of like the substrate, the thing that is under it.
I'm just thinking about it in terms of construction as like, you know, like the, the sub architecture
of the city or of the, you know, the, the, the, the foundation of the building or whatever.
And, you know, we tend to think about that, like the, the good substrate is the unmoving,
unchanging, um, stable place for something else to happen.
But that's not the most interesting thing about it is that it actually allows for a, a, a ratio,
a difference, a, a disequilibrium that now allows stuff to play on its surface, which the running
out of that play will invariably undo the substance, which will then invariably produce a different,
different parameters for different kind of play on the surface, right?
This is where, I mean, something like even the masochism book, for instance, or Kafka as a figure
for this is, I mean, this is one of the places that goes, but it's kind of like, hey, create the
most banal mechanical repetition imaginable.
And that's where the cool shit happens.
In other words, not like, hey, we got to figure out something underneath or hidden within,
you know, it's like, no, no, no, that is the mechanism.
That is the, in a way, I guess maybe what I'm saying is I, I feel like in some senses,
this is way more ontological and the other stuff is way more ethical, right?
Like how does one live in, you know, this is sort of like, I'm trying to describe this,
you know, this ontological diagram of series.
And then when the, but when the question shifts to how does one live within that,
it becomes a kind of different problem, you know, or a different way of thinking.
And, you know, so for instance, like you have this, this, this, there's a locution here
that recurs throughout the Logic of Sense of like the behind the back of consciousness, right?
Is, is where the interesting stuff, the becoming, the event, it's, it's where it happens.
And, um, and so, you know, you kind of want to say like, this is, this is what makes me think
I really need to get more into psychoanalysis, which I've always, always avoided.
Um, but that it is, there is like, in a sense, thinking in his sense, right?
The sense that we're talking about here in terms of, you know, um, not necessarily recognition
or understanding, but the, the, the, the paradoxical component of, of thinking, like thinking only
happens without, within and, and, but irreducible to consciousness.
So, you know, we, we use the word I think or whatever, but that's not what we're doing,
right?
Like that, uh, that thinking actually is the thing that kind of happens to us amidst our
total authoritarian impulses, right?
Like our authority, like I want to control, contain, I want to know exactly what this is.
And, um, and that's the thing that interests me is to kind of, rather than resisting stability,
which I feel like we're getting here in this book, we're getting this notion of there's a,
there are efforts to produce stability and then there's a kind of counter, a necessary counter
effort.
And I'm like, I feel like what, what appeals to me more, and I do get this in Derrida as
well, is like, no, no, no.
The investment instability is the same thing as an investment in instability, right?
Like the, the total authoritarian control oriented impulse is the same impulse.
It's not a different one.
It's not like you have two things in tension, you know?
But I mean, I guess you'd get that.
I mean, maybe, maybe we need to, you know, maybe I need to think more in terms of the,
the inter-series relation that nonsense provides.
I mean, if I took that a little bit more seriously, it's not simply that you can't have one without
the other, which of course is true, but it's more that, uh, you know, maybe the idea of a
dualism that I'm projecting onto this is not necessary, right?
Like you have, because I'm thinking of it as series and relations as opposed to series
emerging from the relations.
Do you know what I'm saying?
Series of...
Early, early on, John, we were talking about the, the, the two kinds of series that, um, uh, that
the Aeon and the Kronos produce.
Yeah.
Like the, the, the first series as being so infinitesimally small that it's beyond the
thinkable and the other one so in like, um, huge that it's beyond the thinkable that we're
getting, I mean, I've been trying to think through those relationships of series as, as
well.
And that, that might be a good place to, to...
Well, and that's a, that's good because in, and there's another way of saying like, it's
perfectly, I, I, as I'm, as I'm thinking through this, like, I'm not keeping the bi-directionality
of this intact, right?
I'm, I'm oscillating.
I'm saying like, you know, and it's hard to keep the bi-directionality of it intact.
I mean, it's, um, that, that I'm, I'm sort of thinking of, you know, at one instant, I'm
thinking of a one direction and the next instant, the next direction, which is what's allowing
me to think that there are two things in tension.
Um, as opposed to saying, no, no, no, if you have bi-directionality, that, that isn't
necessarily, that's not, it's not the same thing as tension, you know?
Um, it's not the same thing as two forces that are kind of opposed, right?
Like, I mean, the language, the language leads to that.
I mean, he talks about opposition all the time, right?
The language sort of leads towards that, but he also wants to say opposition isn't contradiction,
right?
Like, it's not the same thing as composition, as contradiction.
Well, I mean, that's the whole point of the paradox is that the paradox has to shoot equally
in, in both directions.
It has to.
Divide up the, the, you know, that the smaller and the larger at the same time, the past and
the future at the same time, right?
And, you know, I mean, when I was talking about the relationship of, of Kronos and, and, um,
the Aeon, I was temporalizing that relationship was like, first you have the chronological moment
and then it expresses itself.
But I mean, I think you have to think about those totally simultaneously.
And you have to think about these two senses of the present at the exact same moments where,
you know, like the, the, I mean, the, the chronological moment is, is, is only ever its own self-expression
and its own self-undoing that, and that was just shot through imminently with, with the Aeon.
Or we could say that there was always a chronological dimension to the, to the Aeon.
And that gets, that helps, I think, alleviate some of, of the tension stuff and helps us read a lot
of like the paradox, like, um, not in terms of opposites or, you know, um, yeah.
Because I, I mean, and the reason I say this, and it goes back, you can read this stuff in the docs,
my docs chapter, right?
Like the docs chapter is written against, and I felt this way for a long time is the most sophisticated
thinking along these directions is always gets to the point of an irresolvable tension
between dissolution and stability, right?
That's it.
And, and I mean, you just see permanence and change, whatever, that's the Burke, you know,
but there's a bazillion names for it.
And that's the, that is the most sophisticated version.
And I'm always dissatisfied with that, right?
That, that maintaining of a duality as the, as the basic ontological condition.
And what has always appealed to me about Deleuze and Derrida in particular,
and frankly, Nietzsche, I gotta be honest, right?
Like, is precisely that they don't give you that, or rather they give you that in different forms,
you know, in different places.
And so if you read through the progression of it, because another question here is, how
does one write this thinking?
Which is always, for me, an interesting question.
Like, given that you want to think, like, what you were just saying about the way you narrativized
time there, which is you started with Kronos and then you Aonized it, right?
Like, how does one write that?
Because you can't start with everything simultaneously.
And it's the problem of starting.
I mean, he brings it up.
Like, how does one begin, right?
And so how does one narrate, it doesn't have to be narrated, but how does one write?
How does one write or think that movement?
And clearly the strategy that Deleuze has hit upon is, and throughout his career, is dualism, right?
Like, dualism and oscillating, like, switching the dualisms over and over again.
So, I mean, you know.
When you hit on that with your writing, you've described this as, like, you know, you start
with the, you know, what the sort of doxic, commonsensical understanding of the thing.
And then you show how it undoes itself.
Then you show how it undoes itself.
And then you come back to the first thing.
Then you have to come back to it.
You have to come back, like, look, this thing was never wrong in the first place.
That's all it ever was.
It was always already doing this thing, and there's no way it couldn't have been, right?
And that's...
It's the know your audience for me.
Like, that chapter was like, know your audience.
And then I go through and undo, like, how ridiculous that is.
And then where it opens up to.
And then at the end, it's like, so, yeah, know your audience, right?
That's all.
I mean, you know, it's just like...
So you start...
But that's such a Hegelian move when you think about it, right?
Because I'm basically going from, let's say, a simplicity to a complication that returns
you to a second order, a simplicity prime, right?
The second order of simplicity that is the same simplicity, but not the same simplicity, you
know?
But I mean, you know, that's, unfortunately, probably because Hegel's just right.
And that's, you know...
I mean, in terms of how consciousness represents it to itself, right?
And that's a particular distinction.
He's trying to get behind or, you know, problematize.
I love that word because it doesn't mean anything.
It really helped me in our last two sessions.
I mean, really, John, your overview of the historical overview of, you know, the sort
of the big picture question of structure in the event has really helped me situate this
text as an attempt to try to think the relationship between structure and event.
And this, to me, this really helps me think about sense as that thing that is both structure
and event sort of wrapped into one thing.
That's right.
Because sense here becomes both the common good sense body that, you know, we might like
think in terms of structure, that it may think structurally.
But then sense is also the infinitive to sense, to make sense of.
To make sense, right.
Yeah, it's always eventing or reinventing, eventing or re-eventing the, that body.
And that just makes me think of, like, sorry, now I'm getting excited.
So, you know, you were saying the relation, the relation, you know, to think the relationship
between structure and event, and I, and I, in my head, I completed your sentence as to
think the relationship between structure and event as something other than a relationship.
Right.
And that's, and then that instantly hit on me towards Nate's project of, like, maybe that's
his beef.
Maybe that's a way of articulating his beef with all of this sort of, like, what we have
today, the new materialism thing, because the new materialism and the broad stuff is all
about relationality.
But it's about relationality, even though it says relationality is primary, which it says
all the time, but if relationality is primary, it's no longer a relation.
It, it really, like, you have to take that next step and say, if, if we say the relationship
between, like, you know, the subject and object, you know, it's like, if you take the relation
as being primary, it's no longer a relation.
Because the two things are sort of residual side effects, because otherwise you're just making
relation into your new object.
Right.
Relations become the new object in that new paradigm.
And now we're talking about the relations between relations.
But what has changed?
Right.
Like, because that would be precisely how we've always understood humans and things is composed
of atoms and relationships, whatever.
So, so really.
It would be a mistake to say that there are relationships at all.
That's right.
That there is any substance to a relationship that you have to think about.
If you're going to think about relation prior to relata, then you have to think about a
relationship then as always that, that, that cut, like a decision, a cut.
That's right.
A whatever it is.
Performatively.
Yes, exactly.
Yes.
Actively.
Like, it has to be an action.
It cannot be a relationship.
Exactly.
Which then, you know, both of the relata and the relationship are, are now secondary effects
of.
That's right.
Of a, of the performative cut.
Of a cut.
Of an action.
Right.
Of an event.
In, in this sense.
That's great.
I didn't use the word action just because we, so, we, we tend to dehumanize action as
sort of like coming from an agent.
That's right.
Yeah.
Active force.
How would, would that be, would that be better?
But no, that, I think that that's right.
I mean, I think that's the, or a signifying movement or I, you know what I would call it.
Motherfucking style, bitches.
There it is.
We could not let a meeting go.
No.
Hey, are you working on a book on style right now?
Yeah.
Jeez.
Who do?
It's funny you should mention that, Caddy.
Yeah.
But I, I didn't prepare anything, but.
But I really like that as a way of thinking this and as a way of addressing the problems
that I was addressing towards this in terms of writing is that, is that, you know, to see
relationality as primaries, to see it as not a relation.
And that's, and that that's crucial.
You know, because if it's a relation.
It's just to say sense is both structure and event.
It is always, that's right.
It is always, sense is nothing more than the.
Which is not to homogenize them.
No.
That's the other part.
Like, it's not to say, oh, they're just the same thing.
Yeah.
No, no, no, no.
Is that, that the, the operation of sense is always simultaneously up, up, that the process
of structuring and destructuring or, you know, like the, the, the structuring that structuring
that, um, that, yeah.
Events are destructuring.
Right.
It's, yeah.
And it's like, it's hard because every word that I think like pro you just use process right
there.
I'd be like, eh, it's a non-process or, eh, it's a non-relation, you know, and so, but
that's the problem of writing, you know, is that how does one render the thing that's irreducible
to signification or how does one think the thing that's behind the back of consciousness?
And it's not, and the crucial part being, it's not because it's kind of there and you're
trying, you can't quite get your eye on it.
It's because it's not, it's not there and it's always in, it's always in the turning
Of your head to catch it.
It's not because, like, oh, it's behind the back of consciousness.
So if consciousness could just, like, turn around really fucking fast, it would, right.
It would, it could get it, but consciousness can't do that because we're finite and all
that other shit.
But it's like, no, no, no.
It's the turning of the head to catch it, to see it, or of consciousness to think it.
That is, I mean, fucking Deleuze says it brilliantly that the problem of writing in
order to designate something exactly, and exact expressions are absolutely necessary, not
because it is an approximation, because it is a direct rendering of that which is underway.
Holy fuck.
I know that verbatim.
I know that was like verbatim.
That was, that was verbatim.
Damn.
I was going to ask, do you have that posted above your monitor so you can just read it?
I just have said it so many, because when I came across that, I had already written the
dissertation.
So that was when I was doing revisions for the book when I came across that quote and I was
like, oh my God, you know, this is such a fantastic quote.
And it's been, what, 10 years now of that quotation.
And I'm just like, I would keep returning to it.
I'm like, that is the mantra for composition studies.
The problem of, I mean, it's as explicit as you could be.
The problem of writing, colon, right?
Like, you know, and then everything that follows.
I'm like, this is what composition studies for at least, you know, my and probably our articulations.
That's it.
Right.
This, how does one write that which is irreducible to, to signification?
And not because it's there.
I mean, this is, and I think this is actually gets at the difference between me and Diane.
Right.
Like, that I think Diane thinks of alterity as something that's there to be attended to.
And I'm like, it's not there until any given encounter.
It's not like there's just an alterity there.
There is only that encounter.
And that is what produces the sense of an alterity that was already there.
It's not like there's just an alterity, but it's not like there's just an alterity there.
It's not like there's just an alterity there.